README.md, before:

# South African ID Validator

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Badges](#badges)
- [Features](#features)
- [System Requirements](#system-requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
    - [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License Information](#license-information)

## Introduction

The `SouthAfricanIDValidator` PHP package is your comprehensive solution for validating South African ID numbers,
crucial for any application processing or verifying South African identities. Validation of ID numbers is essential, as
it ensures that IDs adhere to both specific structural and contextual standards outlined in South African identity
documentation. This package stands out for its ease of use, high accuracy, and thorough validation checks, including
structure and format validation, birth date verification, gender, citizenship status, and race indicator digits, and
applying the Luhn algorithm for checksum digit validation.

## Badges

[![Packagist Version](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![Packagist Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![Packagist License](https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
[![PHP from Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/php-v/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator/v/stable)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![PHPStan Enabled](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHPStan-enabled-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://phpstan.org/)
[![Phan Enabled](https://img.shields.io/badge/Phan-enabled-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://github.com/phan/phan/)
[![Psalm Enabled](https://img.shields.io/badge/Psalm-enabled-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://psalm.dev/)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/MarjovanLier/SouthAfricanIDValidator/graph/badge.svg?token=bwkvkESlLe)](https://codecov.io/github/MarjovanLier/SouthAfricanIDValidator)

## Features

- Validates the structure and format of South African ID numbers.
- Checks the validity of the birth date encoded within the ID number.
- Verifies gender, citizenship status, and race indicator digits.
- Applies the Luhn algorithm to validate the checksum digit.

## System Requirements

- PHP version 8.2 or higher.

## Installation

### Getting Started

To begin using the `SouthAfricanIDValidator` in your project, follow these simple steps:

1. **Install via Composer** - Run the following command to install the package:

   ```bash
   composer require marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator
   ```

2. **Basic Usage Example** - After installation, you can start validating South African ID numbers with the following
   code snippet:

   ```php
   use MarjovanLier\SouthAfricanIDValidator\SouthAfricanIDValidator;

   // Instantiate the ID validator
   $validator = new SouthAfricanIDValidator();

   // Validate a South African ID number
   $idNumber = 'Your South African ID number here';
   $isValid = $validator->luhnIDValidate($idNumber);

   if ($isValid === true) {
       echo 'The ID number is valid.';
   } elseif ($isValid === false) {
       echo 'The ID number is invalid.';
   } else {
       echo 'The ID number does not meet specific constraints.';
   }
   ```

To integrate the `SouthAfricanIDValidator` into your project, install it via Composer:

```bash
composer require marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator
```

## Usage

To validate a South African ID number, instantiate the `SouthAfricanIDValidator` class and call the `luhnIDValidate`
method:

```php
use MarjovanLier\SouthAfricanIDValidator\SouthAfricanIDValidator;

$idNumber = 'Your South African ID number here';

$result = SouthAfricanIDValidator::luhnIDValidate($idNumber);

if ($result) {
    echo 'The ID number is valid.';
} elseif (!$result) {
    echo 'The ID number is invalid.';
} else {
    echo 'The ID number does not meet specific constraints.';
}
```

The `luhnIDValidate` method returns `true` if the ID number is valid, `false` if it's invalid, and `null` if specific
criteria aren't met (e.g., incorrect citizenship status digit).

## Troubleshooting

Encountering issues? Here are solutions to some common problems:

- **Problem:** Difficulty in installing the package via Composer.
    - **Solution:** Verify your PHP version is at least 8.2 and that Composer is correctly installed on your system. For
      persistent issues, try clearing Composer's cache with `composer clear-cache` and attempt the installation again.

- **Problem:** Validation consistently results in `false`.
    - **Solution:** Ensure the ID number being validated conforms to the South African ID standard format of
      YYMMDDSSSSCAZ, consisting of exactly 13 digits.

- **Problem:** Validation returns `null` for certain IDs.
    - **Solution:** A `null` response typically indicates a problem with the citizenship status digit (the 11th
      character). This digit must be '0', '1', or '2' to represent a South African citizen, a permanent resident, or a
      refugee, respectively.

For additional help or to report a new issue, please visit our GitHub issue tracker.

## Testing

Run the following command to execute the unit tests included with the package:

```bash
composer tests
```

## Contributing

We value your contributions to the SouthAfricanIDValidator package! Here's how you can help:

1. **Report Issues or Suggest Enhancements** - Noticed a bug or have an idea to make the package better? Start by filing
   an issue on our GitHub repo. This lets us discuss possible changes before you start coding.

2. **Contribute Code** - Fork the repo, then create a new branch for your work, adhering to our branching strategy
   guidelines. This keeps things organised and ensures consistency across contributions.

3. **Follow Our Coding Standards** - Write clean, readable code that adheres to our coding standards. This makes it
   easier for everyone to understand and maintain.

4. **Write or Update Tests** - Help ensure reliability by writing tests for new features or updating existing tests as
   needed.

5. **Submit a Pull Request** - Finished making changes? Open a pull request against the main branch with a detailed
   explanation of what you did and why.

Your contributions are crucial to improving the SouthAfricanIDValidator package for everyone!

## License Information

The SouthAfricanIDValidator is proudly open-sourced under the MIT Licence.
This licence allows you to use, modify, distribute and contribute back to the package, both in private and commercial
projects, but you must include the original copyright and license notice in any copy of the software.
For full details about your rights and obligations, refer to the [License File](LICENSE).

## Release Notes

Stay updated by checking our [GitHub Releases page](https://github.com/MarjovanLier/SouthAfricanIDValidator/releases).

Commit message:

Update testing instructions in README.md
Added a step in the testing section of README.md to ensure all necessary development dependencies are installed prior to running unit tests. This addition will be helpful for those who do not have the required dependencies installed by default.

README.md, after:

# South African ID Validator

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Badges](#badges)
- [Features](#features)
- [System Requirements](#system-requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
    - [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License Information](#license-information)

## Introduction

The `SouthAfricanIDValidator` PHP package is your comprehensive solution for validating South African ID numbers,
crucial for any application processing or verifying South African identities. Validation of ID numbers is essential, as
it ensures that IDs adhere to both specific structural and contextual standards outlined in South African identity
documentation. This package stands out for its ease of use, high accuracy, and thorough validation checks, including
structure and format validation, birth date verification, gender, citizenship status, and race indicator digits, and
applying the Luhn algorithm for checksum digit validation.

## Badges

[![Packagist Version](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![Packagist Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![Packagist License](https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
[![PHP from Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/php-v/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator/v/stable)](https://packagist.org/packages/marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator)
[![PHPStan Enabled](https://img.shields.io/badge/PHPStan-enabled-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://phpstan.org/)
[![Phan Enabled](https://img.shields.io/badge/Phan-enabled-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://github.com/phan/phan/)
[![Psalm Enabled](https://img.shields.io/badge/Psalm-enabled-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://psalm.dev/)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/github/MarjovanLier/SouthAfricanIDValidator/graph/badge.svg?token=bwkvkESlLe)](https://codecov.io/github/MarjovanLier/SouthAfricanIDValidator)

## Features

- Validates the structure and format of South African ID numbers.
- Checks the validity of the birth date encoded within the ID number.
- Verifies gender, citizenship status, and race indicator digits.
- Applies the Luhn algorithm to validate the checksum digit.

## System Requirements

- PHP version 8.2 or higher.

## Installation

### Getting Started

To begin using the `SouthAfricanIDValidator` in your project, follow these simple steps:

1. **Install via Composer** - Run the following command to install the package:

   ```bash
   composer require marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator
   ```

2. **Basic Usage Example** - After installation, you can start validating South African ID numbers with the following
   code snippet:

   ```php
   use MarjovanLier\SouthAfricanIDValidator\SouthAfricanIDValidator;

   // Instantiate the ID validator
   $validator = new SouthAfricanIDValidator();

   // Validate a South African ID number
   $idNumber = 'Your South African ID number here';
   $isValid = $validator->luhnIDValidate($idNumber);

   if ($isValid === true) {
       echo 'The ID number is valid.';
   } elseif ($isValid === false) {
       echo 'The ID number is invalid.';
   } else {
       echo 'The ID number does not meet specific constraints.';
   }
   ```

To integrate the `SouthAfricanIDValidator` into your project, install it via Composer:

```bash
composer require marjovanlier/southafricanidvalidator
```

## Usage

To validate a South African ID number, instantiate the `SouthAfricanIDValidator` class and call the `luhnIDValidate`
method:

```php
use MarjovanLier\SouthAfricanIDValidator\SouthAfricanIDValidator;

$idNumber = 'Your South African ID number here';

$result = SouthAfricanIDValidator::luhnIDValidate($idNumber);

if ($result) {
    echo 'The ID number is valid.';
} elseif (!$result) {
    echo 'The ID number is invalid.';
} else {
    echo 'The ID number does not meet specific constraints.';
}
```

The `luhnIDValidate` method returns `true` if the ID number is valid, `false` if it's invalid, and `null` if specific
criteria aren't met (e.g., incorrect citizenship status digit).

## Troubleshooting

Encountering issues? Here are solutions to some common problems:

- **Problem:** Difficulty in installing the package via Composer.
    - **Solution:** Verify your PHP version is at least 8.2 and that Composer is correctly installed on your system. For
      persistent issues, try clearing Composer's cache with `composer clear-cache` and attempt the installation again.

- **Problem:** Validation consistently results in `false`.
    - **Solution:** Ensure the ID number being validated conforms to the South African ID standard format of
      YYMMDDSSSSCAZ, consisting of exactly 13 digits.

- **Problem:** Validation returns `null` for certain IDs.
    - **Solution:** A `null` response typically indicates a problem with the citizenship status digit (the 11th
      character). This digit must be '0', '1', or '2' to represent a South African citizen, a permanent resident, or a
      refugee, respectively.

For additional help or to report a new issue, please visit our GitHub issue tracker.

## Testing

First, ensure you have all the necessary development dependencies installed by running `composer install --dev`.
Then, run the following command to execute the unit tests included with the package:

```bash
composer tests
```

## Contributing

We value your contributions to the SouthAfricanIDValidator package! Here's how you can help:

1. **Report Issues or Suggest Enhancements** - Noticed a bug or have an idea to make the package better? Start by filing
   an issue on our GitHub repo. This lets us discuss possible changes before you start coding.

2. **Contribute Code** - Fork the repo, then create a new branch for your work, adhering to our branching strategy
   guidelines. This keeps things organised and ensures consistency across contributions.

3. **Follow Our Coding Standards** - Write clean, readable code that adheres to our coding standards. This makes it
   easier for everyone to understand and maintain.

4. **Write or Update Tests** - Help ensure reliability by writing tests for new features or updating existing tests as
   needed.

5. **Submit a Pull Request** - Finished making changes? Open a pull request against the main branch with a detailed
   explanation of what you did and why.

Your contributions are crucial to improving the SouthAfricanIDValidator package for everyone!

## License Information

The SouthAfricanIDValidator is proudly open-sourced under the MIT Licence.
This licence allows you to use, modify, distribute and contribute back to the package, both in private and commercial
projects, but you must include the original copyright and license notice in any copy of the software.
For full details about your rights and obligations, refer to the [License File](LICENSE).

## Release Notes

Stay updated by checking our [GitHub Releases page](https://github.com/MarjovanLier/SouthAfricanIDValidator/releases).
